---
layout: article
title: A Glorious QA Rant sprinkled with AI
author: Thierry de Pauw
category: articles
tags: [ Testing, AI ]
image: /images/shades-of-conways-law/conways_law_cornet.png
---

Recently, on one of my clients' Slack, an article "*Quality Engineering with AI*" was shared as an example of running QA in the AI era. The client was kind of enthusiastic about the article as it somehow confirmed their subpar testing strategy. I violently disagreed with the article supported with arguments. However, the client underpinned their strategy with Martin Fowler's [On the Diverse And Fantastical Shapes of Testing](https://martinfowler.com/articles/2021-test-shapes.html). The level of ignorance and stupidity in the industry is plain disconcerting - *causing one to feel unsettled*. It got beyond all levels of any understanding.

---

‼️ Caution. Written in a state of rage.

---

The article ends with a TLDR.

> 1. Focus tests at the E2E level as this will be more static than the code.
> 2. Build your testing scope around the lines you will not cross (regressions, security, maintainability).
> 3. You can’t review everything, use E2E tests and AI reviews to find smells that you want to deep dive into.
> 4. Use shift right testing to cover business context and pick up what your tests might have missed, feed back learnings as context to improve your AI generated tests over time.

The idea to focus on end-to-end tests, in the first point, is supported by the idea that the outputs of AI are non-deterministic, thus the generated code will change all the time and thus makes it hard for traditional tests (read *Unit Tests*) to keep working. The author assumes the code will change frequently and even be ephemeral with the amount of AI refactoring. However, the product and its features should remain static. Therefore, testing should focus on that level. We should invert the traditional [*Testing Pyramid*](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestPyramid.html) to have more end-to-end tests using [BDD](https://dannorth.net/blog/introducing-bdd/) to test the desired behaviours. Testing at this level should be more comprehensive, including errors and edge cases to ensure that AI code changes do not introduce any regressions. According to the author, this would be more effective even so it would be slower and less efficient. WTF!

Point two is a bit messy. I had to re-read the article several times to understand what the author mend. Basically, it comes down to the fact that AI can change large amounts of the code base unexpectedly. Therefore, there is a risk of introducing regressions, data leaks and sloppy code. Therefore, the author advises again end-to-end tests but also shifting right with observability to avoid regressions; security scans, penetration testing and reviews to prevent security issues like data leaks; and cyclomatic complexity and human reviews to spot sloppy code.

Point three comes down to the AI will generate too much code for the team to keep up reviewing. Thus, we will use the AI to review the code the AI generated. That is going to work well. Luckily, we have the slow end-to-end tests to safe us and it is suggested to shift right to if the team does not have the time to test.

Lastly, point four is essentially about the fact the AI does not know the intrinsic details of the business and the domain to allow the AI to properly generate the tests. To improve that, the author suggests writing more verbose user stories to feed the AI, and again to shift right to observe where failures happen after releasing AI generated code to inform future tests (generated by AI?).

This all looks very eventual. Low-performing organisations already applied all what has been suggested here before AI even existed, and it did not work. Imagine what will happen once these organisations start adopting AI. Yes, indeed, it will not look pretty. There will be casualties.

First of all, AI has not changed anything about the mechanics of software delivery. The principles are still valid.

There is a reason for the *Testing Pyramid*. It is feedback and economics. It goes together with [Continuous Integration]({% post_url 2022-06-14-the-practices-that-make-continuous-integration %}) and the Deployment Pipeline from [Continuous Delivery]({% post_url 2026-01-09-what-is-continuous-delivery %}). We want loads of *Unit Tests*. They have to be quick because these are the tests that are executed all the time by engineers with every change as part of the [*Local Build*](#local-build) to inform them whether they broke something or not. It signals us whether we introduced regressions. Same for AI. With every code change by AI, these tests have to pass. We can even tell the AI, as long as these tests do not pass, your job is not done. Start over.

It is economics because *Unit Tests* are executed many, many times by engineers with the [*Local Build*](#local-build) and by machines remotely as part of the [*Commit Build*](#commit-build). Most regressions have to be detected at this level to provide engineers confidence they can move one once it passes the *Commit Build*. It is impossible to achieve this level of fast feedback with end-to-end tests.

When code becomes ephemeral because the AI is changing the code all the time and thus we cannot use *Unit Tests* anymore, something is seriously wrong in the use of AI. Teams have to reconsider how they use AI in that case.

Focussing testing only on end-to-end tests is a mistake. Most organisations I encounter tried that, it did not work. Well, they made it work but at the expense of lead times, reduced feedback, hence diminished quality and staff fatigue. Trying to test all errors and corner cases with only end-to-end tests is unmanageable. There are a plethora of permutations and combinations one cannot conceive. However, we do need [*Automated Acceptance Tests*]({% post_url 2021-07-22-acceptance-testing-for-continuous-delivery-dave-farley %}) (not end-to-end tests). Yet, they only cover the happy paths. The errors and corner cases are handled by *Unit Tests*. And, we do have *Smoke Tests*, they are end-to-end to test the integration of the system. Is the backend there? Are third-party services available? Can we execute the most important transaction? However, we only have a couple of them, maximum five.

I am all for Shift Right, with monitoring and observability, if there has been first a Shift Left. Only Shift Right is an unmade bed, that we will lose, for sure. I give you that. Shift Right is what happened with waterfall. We know how that went. It was no oil painting (*love this synonym for "It was not pretty"*).

When telling all this to my client, they told me we follow "trophy testing", upon which they shared Martin Fowler's [On the Diverse And Fantastical Shapes of Testing](https://martinfowler.com/articles/2021-test-shapes.html) and a presentation of their testing strategy to make their point. The organisation invested heavily in end-to-end tests because the underlying technology does not allow for unit testing. Therefore, the article "Quality Engineering and AI" confirmed their choices together with Martin Fowler mentioning *Sociable Tests* in the context of *Integration Tests* which is the advised approach of the [Testing Trophy](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/the-testing-trophy-and-testing-classifications).

When reading Martin Fowler's article, I did not immediately understand the point they were trying to make. Using Martin Fowler to stress end-to-end tests is certainly confident. Until I looked at their testing strategy presentation. They state *Unit Test is a bit of messy concept* while mentioning *Sociable Tests* and *Solitary Tests*. Then it became clear to me. They conflated Integration Tests with *Sociable Tests*. They did not understood that *Sociable Tests* are *Unit Tests* that test one class in collaboration with other classes (that have their own Unit Tests). Where *Solitary Tests* are mockist style *Unit Tests*. *Sociable Tests* are not Integration Tests. They do not test integrations. Integrations are tested with [*Contract Tests*](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ContractTest.html). In the end, [Integrated Tests are a scam](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VDfX44fZoMc).

## In Conclusion

As one [SoCraTes France](https://socrates-fr.github.io/) participant once said, in the IT industry, people do not know their history. That was the reason for [Laurent Bossavit](https://www.linkedin.com/in/bossavit/) to publish [The Leprechauns of Software Engineering](https://leanpub.com/leprechauns). With every new technology introduced, the same mistakes are repeated.

## Acknowledgements

[Elizabeth Zagroba](https://mastodon.social/@ez@chaos.social) to help me remove the sharp edges.

## Definitions

### Commit Build

The *Commit Build* is a build performed during the first stage of the [Deployment Pipeline](https://continuousdelivery.com/implementing/patterns/#the-deployment-pipeline) or the central build server. It involves checking out the latest sources from *Mainline* and at minimum compiling the sources, running a set of [*Commit Tests*](#commit-tests), and building a binary artefact for deployment.

### Commit Tests

The *Commit Tests* comprise all of the Unit Tests along with a small simple smoke test suite executed during the *Commit Build*. This smoke test suite includes a few simple Integration and Acceptance Tests deemed important enough to get early feedback.

### Local Build

The *Local Build* is identical to the [*Commit Build*](#commit-build) performed by the [Deployment Pipeline](https://continuousdelivery.com/implementing/patterns/#the-deployment-pipeline) or the central build server, except for some additional actions only performed by the *Commit Build* in particular uploading build artefacts. See [Run a Local Build]({% post_url 2022-09-28-the-practices-that-make-continuous-integration-building %}#practice-12-run-a-local-build) for more details.
