---
layout: article
title: Don’t Let AI Invert The Testing Pyramid
author: Thierry de Pauw
category: articles
tags: [ Testing, AI ]
---

Recently, on one of my clients' Slack channels, an article "*Quality Engineering with AI*" was shared as an example of running QA in the AI era. The client was somewhat enthusiastic about the article, as it somehow confirmed their subpar testing strategy. I fiercely disagreed with the article, supported with arguments. However, the client was still convinced of doing right, underpinning their strategy with Martin Fowler's [On the Diverse And Fantastical Shapes of Testing](https://martinfowler.com/articles/2021-test-shapes.html). Oh dear, the level of ignorance and stupidity in the industry is plain disconcerting - *causing one to feel unsettled*. It got beyond all levels of understanding.

---

> ‼️ **Caution:** Written in a moment of extreme professional clarity (and total lack of patience). Fuelled by equal parts whisky and disbelief. Handle with care: contains high traces of professional exasperation.

---

The article's TLDR goes like this ...

> 1. Focus tests at the E2E level, as this will be more static than the code.
> 2. Build your testing scope around the lines you will not cross (regressions, security, maintainability).
> 3. You can’t review everything, so use E2E tests and AI reviews to find smells that you want to deep dive into.
> 4. Use shift right testing to cover business context and pick up what your tests might have missed, feed back learnings as context to improve your AI-generated tests over time.

The idea to focus on end-to-end tests, in the first point, is corroborated by the notion that AI outputs are non-deterministic. Thus, the generated code will change all the time, making it difficult for traditional tests (read *Unit Tests*) to keep working. The author assumes the code will change frequently and even be ephemeral, given the amount of AI refactoring. However, the product and its features should remain static. Therefore, testing should focus on that level. As a result, we should invert the traditional [*Testing Pyramid*](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestPyramid.html) to have more end-to-end tests using [Behaviour Driven Development (BDD)](https://dannorth.net/blog/introducing-bdd/) to test the desired behaviours. Testing at this level should be more comprehensive, including errors and edge cases to ensure that AI code changes do not introduce any regressions. According to the author, this would be more effective, even though it would be slower and less efficient. WTF!

Point two is a bit messy. I had to re-read the article several times to understand what the author meant. Basically, it comes down to the fact that AI can change large amounts of the code base unexpectedly. Therefore, there is a risk of introducing regressions, data leaks and sloppy code resulting in a maintainability nightmare. Hence, the author advises again end-to-end tests but also shifting right with observability to avoid regressions; together with security scans, penetration testing and reviews to prevent security issues like data leaks; and cyclomatic complexity and human reviews to spot code smells. Security scans, code quality scans, and penetration testing are certainly good initiatives regardless of AI. Reviews to prevent security issues are delusional. We will come back to the end-to-end tests and shifting right later on.

Point three comes down to the AI generating too much code for the team to keep up with reviewing. Thus, we will use the AI to review the code that the AI generated. That is going to work well. Luckily, we have those slow end-to-end tests to save us while suggesting that we also shift right when the team does not have the time to test. Sure, that sounds like a plan. Hell, no!

Lastly, point four essentially is about the fact that the AI does not know the intrinsic details of the business and domain to allow the AI to properly generate the tests. To improve that, the author suggests writing more verbose user stories to feed the AI, and again to shift right to observe where failures happen after releasing AI-generated code to inform future tests (generated by AI?).

This all looks especially eventual, and non-deterministic. Low-performing organisations already applied all what has been suggested here before AI even existed - except maybe for security and code complexity scanning, which was already advanced, however, it is not today anymore, this should be default now -, yet, it still did not work. Imagine what will happen once these organisations start adopting AI. Yes, indeed, it will not look pretty. There will be casualties.

First of all, AI has not changed a single thing about the mechanics of software delivery. The principles are still valid.

There is a reason for the *Testing Pyramid*. It is feedback and economics. It goes together with [Continuous Integration]({% post_url 2022-06-14-the-practices-that-make-continuous-integration %}) and the Deployment Pipeline from [Continuous Delivery]({% post_url 2026-01-09-what-is-continuous-delivery %}). We want plenty of *Unit Tests*. They need to be quick to enable engineers to execute them all the time for every change as part of the [*Local Build*](#local-build) to inform them whether they broke something or not. It signals us whether we introduced regressions. Same for AI. With every code change by AI, these tests must pass. We can even inform the AI, as long as these tests do not pass, your job is not done. Start over.

It is economics because *Unit Tests* are executed many, many times by engineers with the [*Local Build*](#local-build) and by machines remotely as part of the [*Commit Build*](#commit-build). Most regressions must be detected at this level to give engineers the confidence that they can move on once it passes the *Commit Build*. It is downright impossible to achieve this level of fast feedback with end-to-end tests.

When code becomes ephemeral because the AI modifies the code constantly, and hence we cannot use *Unit Tests* anymore, something is seriously wrong with the use of AI. Teams need to reconsider how they use AI in that case.

[Research by Lund University and CodeScene](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.02200), confirmed by early field observations from ThoughtWorks, indicates that AI-assisted coding performs better on high-quality code. Consequently, we can only take advantage of the AI benefits and thus avoid the maintainability nightmare when supported by strong engineering practices, which also involves having a well-layered testing strategy. Engineering excellence has always been a competitive advantage, and it always will be.

Using AI on low-quality codebases poses considerable risks, requiring a high level of human intervention and assistance from code quality assessment tooling. However, according to [CodeScene's Code Red white paper](https://codescene.com/hubfs/web_docs/Business-impact-of-code-quality.pdf), only 10% of the organisations measure code health and technical debt, while engineers waste 42% of their time dealing with poor quality code. At the same time, from experience, most codebases are a facade: a decent-looking house, supported by seemingly working E2E tests, yet sitting on a foundation of rotting timber. The tragedy is that people often do not realise the danger; they have not seen what a solid foundation is, nor what good design and quality code look like. So, good luck with that!

Focusing testing only on end-to-end tests is a mistake. Most organisations I encountered in the past tried that, but it did not work. Well, somehow, they managed to make it work, but at the expense of lead times, reduced feedback, declining quality, and rising staff fatigue. Trying to test all errors and corner cases with only end-to-end tests is inconceivable and simply unmanageable. There are a plethora of permutations and combinations that one cannot foresee. Another aspect is the over-reliance on end-to-end tests - we can change any line of code, and the end-to-end tests will catch any regressions. However, this approach ignores the fact that end-to-end tests do not necessarily cover all modified code paths due to the infinite combinations. Here, the end-to-end tests become the curb appeal, providing a false sense of security. So, that's that.

However, we do need [*Automated Acceptance Tests*]({% post_url 2021-07-22-acceptance-testing-for-continuous-delivery-dave-farley %}) (not end-to-end tests). We implement them using BDD. Yet, they only cover the happy paths. The errors and corner cases are handled by *Unit Tests*. Because it is significantly easier to reason about edge cases with narrow tests. We do have *Smoke Tests*, which are end-to-end in nature, to test the integration of the system. Is the backend there? Are third-party services available? Can we execute the most important transaction? However, we only have a couple of them, a maximum of five. Ultimately, [*Have a Vast Amount of High-Quality Automated Tests*]({% post_url 2022-09-28-the-practices-that-make-continuous-integration-building%}#practice-13-have-a-vast-amount-of-high-quality-automated-tests) implemented in a layered approach is still a necessity with AI-assisted coding.

To train AI to understand the domain, we do not need longer, more detailed user stories. No! That is called upfront design. It is once more returning to waterfall. We still want one-line backlog items, as long as they are good conversation starters. As before AI, we still need precise and concise specifications. When picking up the story, we start a conversation using [Example Mapping](https://cucumber.io/blog/bdd/example-mapping-introduction/) and/or [Event Storming](https://www.eventstorming.com/) to clarify the intent of the story. There is nothing new here. We already did that before. What is new, though, is that now we can feed those specifications to the AI. Teams are already experimenting with this and are having good results, together with high-quality codebases.

I am all for *Shift Right*, with monitoring and observability, when there was first a *Shift Left*. Only Shift Right is an unmade bed that we will lose, for sure. I give you that. Shift Right is what happened with waterfall. We know how that went. It was no oil painting - *it was, definitely, not pretty*.

When explaining all of the above to my client, they reacted with: We follow 'trophy testing', upon which they shared Martin Fowler's [On the Diverse And Fantastical Shapes of Testing](https://martinfowler.com/articles/2021-test-shapes.html) and a presentation of their testing strategy to make their point. The organisation invested heavily in end-to-end tests because the underlying technology does not allow for unit testing. In that case, the article "Quality Engineering and AI" confirmed their choices together with Martin Fowler mentioning *Sociable Tests* in the context of *Integration Tests*, which is also the advised approach with the [Testing Trophy](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/the-testing-trophy-and-testing-classifications).

When reading Martin Fowler's article, I did not immediately understand the point they were trying to make. Particularly, using Martin Fowler to uphold end-to-end tests is certainly a confident move. Until I looked at their testing strategy presentation. They state *Unit Test is a bit of a messy concept* while mentioning *Sociable Tests* and *Solitary Tests*. Then it became clear to me. They conflated *Integration Tests* with *Sociable Tests*. They did not understand that *Sociable Tests* are *Unit Tests* focused on one single class in collaboration with other classes (that have their own Unit Tests). The fixture creates that object with all the necessary dependencies to exercise the object's methods as part of the test. Where *Solitary Tests* are mockist, London-style *Unit Tests* where collaborators are replaced by mocks. So, *Sociable Tests* are definitely not *Integration Tests*. They do not test integrations. Integrations are tested with [*Contract Tests*](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ContractTest.html). In the end, [Integrated Tests are a scam](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VDfX44fZoMc).

## In Conclusion

As one [SoCraTes France](https://socrates-fr.github.io/) participant once said, in the IT industry, people do not know their history. That was the reason for [Laurent Bossavit](https://www.linkedin.com/in/bossavit/) to publish [The Leprechauns of Software Engineering](https://leanpub.com/leprechauns). With every new technology introduced, the same mistakes repeat. Again, the real shift is not AI. It is engineering discipline. It has always been.

Remember that [**writing code has never been the bottleneck**](https://andrewmurphy.io/blog/if-you-thought-the-speed-of-writing-code-was-your-problem-you-have-bigger-problems). Analyse the bloody value stream. It will shout at us where the bottleneck is. What if the bottleneck is the market? If that is the case, we have been accelerating code delivery for something nobody wants. So, there we are, in all embarrassment ...

## Acknowledgements

[Elizabeth Zagroba](https://mastodon.social/@ez@chaos.social) and [Lisi Hocke](https://mastodon.social/@lisihocke) to remove the sharp edges and provide their invaluable additional insights to round the article.

## Related Articles

- [The Practices That Make Continuous Integration - Building for Continuous Integration]({% post_url 2022-09-28-the-practices-that-make-continuous-integration-building %})
- [What is Continuous Delivery]({% post_url 2026-01-09-what-is-continuous-delivery %})

## References

- [Test Pyramid](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestPyramid.html), Martin Fowler, 2012
- [Unit Test](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/UnitTest.html), Martin Fowler, 2014
- [Integrated Tests Are A Scam](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VDfX44fZoMc), J B Rainsberger, 2015
- [The Testing Trophy and Test Classifications](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/the-testing-trophy-and-testing-classifications), Kent C. Dodds, 2021
- [On the Diverse And Fantastical Shapes of Testing](https://martinfowler.com/articles/2021-test-shapes.html), Martin Fowler, 2021
- [Code Red: The business impact of low code quality](https://codescene.com/hubfs/web_docs/Business-impact-of-code-quality.pdf), CodeScene, 2022
- [Code for Machines, Not Just Humans: Quantifying AI-Friendliness with Code Health Metrics](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.02200), Emma Söderberg et al., 2026
- [If you thought the speed of writing code was your problem - you have bigger problems](https://andrewmurphy.io/blog/if-you-thought-the-speed-of-writing-code-was-your-problem-you-have-bigger-problems), Andrew Murphy, 2026

## Definitions

### Commit Build

The *Commit Build* is a build performed during the first stage of the [Deployment Pipeline](https://continuousdelivery.com/implementing/patterns/#the-deployment-pipeline) or the central build server. It involves checking out the latest sources from *Mainline* and, at minimum, compiling the sources, running a set of [*Commit Tests*](#commit-tests), and building a binary artefact for deployment.

### Commit Tests

The *Commit Tests* comprise all the *Unit Tests* along with a small, simple smoke test suite executed during the *Commit Build*. This smoke test suite includes a few simple Integration and Acceptance Tests deemed important enough to get early feedback.

### Local Build

The *Local Build* is identical to the [*Commit Build*](#commit-build) performed by the [Deployment Pipeline](https://continuousdelivery.com/implementing/patterns/#the-deployment-pipeline) or the central build server, except for some additional actions only performed by the *Commit Build*, in particular uploading build artefacts. See [Run a Local Build]({% post_url 2022-09-28-the-practices-that-make-continuous-integration-building %}#practice-12-run-a-local-build) for more details.
